
The Washington Post
Democracy Dies in Darkness

 
Sections 
Subscribe
Sign In
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Google Plus
Share via Email
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Pinterest
Share on Tumblr
Resize Text
Print Article
Comments2.8k

Politics
White House confronts backlash over Trump’s remarks on Charlottesville
 Play Video 3:52
Trump: 'The hate and division must stop'
Embed 
Share 

0:00

Speaking from his resort in Bedminster, N.J., President Trump said, "The hate and division must stop. And must stop now." (The Washington Post)
By John Wagner, Jenna Johnson, Robert Costa and Sari Horwitz August 13 at 8:44 PM 
BEDMINSTER, N.J. — The White House on Sunday sought to quell criticism of President Trump’s failure to denounce by name the white supremacists behind a spate of violence in Charlottesville, a response that associates said was based largely on Trump’s own read of the hate-fueled melee with counterprotesters.

In a statement, and through aides appearing on Sunday talk shows, the White House defended Trump’s general public condemnation Saturday of the events that led to three deaths and dozens of injuries in the picturesque college town in Virginia.

“Of course that includes white supremacists, KKK, Neo-Nazi and all extremist groups,” the White House said in a brief statement, elaborating on Trump’s remarks from his golf club here Saturday in which he decried an “egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many sides” but did not explicitly call out any party for blame.

Later Sunday, Vice President Pence, during a news conference in Cartagena, Colombia, spoke out far more forcefully than Trump had the day before, saying: “We have no tolerance for hate and violence from white supremacists, neo Nazis or the KKK. These dangerous fringe groups have no place in American public life and in the American debate, and we condemn them in the strongest possible terms.”


[Alleged driver of car that plowed into Charlottesville crowd was a Nazi sympathizer, former teacher says]

 Play Video 1:42
Counterprotesters shut down a white nationalist's news conference
Embed 
Share 
Jason Kessler, an organizer for the Unite the Right Rally, was interrupted by counterprotesters on Aug. 13 as he tried to give a news conference. (Video: Elyse Samuels, Whitney Leaming/Photo: Evelyn Hockstein/The Washington Post)
The Justice Department, meanwhile, faced continuing questions Sunday about why it took Attorney General Jeff Sessions as long as it did Saturday to announce a hate-crime investigation and why the FBI has not labeled a deadly car-ramming incident Saturday as an act of “domestic terrorism.”

Sessions did not announce that the department would open a civil rights investigation until nearly 11 p.m. Saturday, after Democratic and Republican lawmakers called for the action. The announcement gave no indication of how broad that inquiry will be.

Sessions is scheduled to appear on three network morning shows Monday to talk about his department’s response.

Sunday’s White House efforts did little to tamp down criticism, including from many Republicans, who said Trump had missed an opportunity for moral leadership and to distance himself from white nationalist groups that embraced his presidency.

Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) said on “Fox News Sunday” that Trump needs to “correct the record here.”

“These groups seem to believe they have a friend in Donald Trump in the White House,” Graham said. “I don’t know why they believe that, but they don’t see me as a friend in the Senate, and I would urge the president to dissuade these groups that he’s their friend.”

National security adviser H.R. McMaster, among the Trump officials to fan out on the public affairs shows, said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that Trump was committed “to bring all Americans together.”

 Play Video 2:02
Charlottesville a day later: Sharp emotions linger with residents, organizers, community
Embed 
Share 
Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D) on Aug. 13 said Charlottesville is “stronger” a day after violence erupted in the city. The organizer of a white nationalist rally said clashes occurred because police declined “to do their job.” (Whitney Leaming, Bastien Inzaurralde/The Washington Post)
“I’m sure you will hear from the president more about this,” McMaster said.

Aides said Trump would continue to get updates on events in Charlottesville, but it was unclear what other steps the White House might take beyond Pence’s statement. Trump stayed out of public view and remained uncharacteristically silent on Twitter through Sunday afternoon.

The president plans to return to Washington on Monday for part of the day and could face additional reporter questions if he conducts a promised news conference.

The development of Trump’s statement Saturday afternoon offered a revealing window into how the White House works in such situations, according to two people familiar with the response. They said that when Trump was first briefed on Charlottesville, he was told that various groups had entered the city and were protesting even though the white supremacists and neo-Nazis organized the rally and others were there to protest against them.

That context — that many groups were involved in violence and not just white nationalists — quickly colored his thinking and prompted him to comment to others in broad terms about the crisis, the people said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to describe private conversations with White House officials.

[Charlottesville victim: ‘She was there standing up for what was right’]

Trump’s approach Saturday — trusting his instincts, averting talk of white nationalism and feeling no obligation to grapple with its consequences — echoed how the president responded last year to an endorsement from David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader who appeared in Charlottesville, the people said.

During the Duke episode and over the weekend, Trump relied almost entirely on his own read of the controversy and responded in his own way rather than reading from talking points from communications aides, the people said.

Trump disavowed hate but did not delve into details. He shrugged off calls from Republicans and others to do so as a politically correct distraction that would not give him credit for his original statement.

The backlash over Trump’s public statement Saturday also posed an early test for new White House Chief of Staff John F. Kelly. But Trump associates played down Kelly’s role, saying the retired Marine general was brought in to bring discipline to the staff and wasn’t a driving force behind Trump’s choice of words.

Few of the president’s top aides were with him in Bedminster as he composed the Charlottesville statement Saturday.

[One group loved Trump’s remarks about Charlottesville: White supremacists]

Press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders left the area Friday morning. Reporters who emailed her received an “out of office” response.

Trump delivered his statement during an awkward bill-signing ceremony on veterans health-care legislation in a club ballroom at his golf club. As he started to leave, reporters shouted questions at him, asking if he would condemn white supremacy. Trump realized he had yet to sign the legislation, so he returned to a small desk to do so. He then left a second time, again ignoring questions.

On Sunday night, protesters gathered on a busy corner here near the public library and a community garden to protest the president, who was staying down the road. One woman held an orange sign that read: “Say it: Domestic terrorism.” Other signs read: “Impeach Trump,” “No hate,” and “Make America Kind Again.”

Civil rights leaders and other activist groups not only urged Trump to speak out more forcefully Sunday but also to fire White House chief strategist Stephen K. Bannon and others whom they accused of having connections to the white nationalist groups. Bannon formerly ran the right-wing Breitbart News, which he called “a platform for the alt-right,” a small, far-right movement that seeks a whites-only state. Bannon has denied that the alt-right is inherently racist or anti-Semitic.

Bannon was not in New Jersey as events unfolded Saturday. Instead, he was in Washington over the weekend, working at the White House on the rollout of new trade measures that would punish China for intellectual property violations, according to a longtime Bannon associate.

While Bannon has harsh critics within the West Wing who disagree with his hard-line nationalism and have urged Trump to remove him, he has purposefully kept a lower profile in recent months that has helped him hold on to his post, the associate said. In an awkward exchange during the “Meet the Press” interview Sunday, McMaster was asked several times if he can continue to work with Bannon, and he repeatedly declined to directly answer.

On Sunday morning, Ivanka Trump, the president’s eldest daughter and a top White House adviser, offered a more direct condemnation of the white nationalist groups than her father, writing on Twitter: “There should be no place in society for racism, white supremacy and neo-nazis.”

While the White House elaborated on Trump’s remarks in the Sunday statement, three of Trump’s top advisers went on television to offer defenses of him.

Tom Bossert, Trump’s homeland security adviser, who has been in direct contact with Charlottesville authorities, repeatedly praised the president on CNN for not naming the groups involved and instead focusing on an overarching call for Americans to love one another.

Bossert said that people “on both sides” showed up in Charlottesville “looking for trouble” and that he wouldn’t assign blame for the death of a counterprotester on either group, although he said the president would like to see “swift justice” for the victim.

McMaster said on ABC’s “This Week” that Trump was “very clear” in his statement and “called out anyone, anyone who is responsible for fomenting this kind of bigotry, hatred, racism and violence.”

Later in the morning, McMaster added on “Meet the Press” that it “ought to be clear to all Americans” that Trump’s comments about bigotry and hatred included white supremacists and neo-Nazis. He also said that he considers the death of the counterprotester in Charlottesville an act of terrorism.

CIA Director Mike Pompeo said on CBS News that the president was “frankly, pretty unambiguous” in responding to the violence. He added: “When someone marches with a Nazi flag, that’s unacceptable, and I think that’s what the president said yesterday.”

Among those critical of Trump on Sunday morning was Anthony Scaramucci, the president’s former communications director, who said on ABC’s “This Week” that he thought Trump “needed to be much harsher as it related to the white supremacists and the nature of that.” Scaramucci’s White House stint lasted 10 days.

Sen. Cory Gardner (R-Colo.), among the growing number of lawmakers critical of Trump’s statement, appeared on CNN’s “State of the Union” and urged the president to speak out directly on the issue and “call this white supremacism, white nationalism evil.” He said the president should do so with the same kind of conviction that he has had in “naming terrorism around the globe as evil.”

Throughout the day Saturday, former Justice Department officials — including former Manhattan U.S. attorney Preet Bharara, former attorney general Eric H. Holder Jr. and former head of the Civil Rights Division Vanita Gupta — called for Sessions to announce that the department would conduct a federal investigation into the Charlottesville violence.

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) called not only for a federal investigation but also for the Justice Department to designate the car-ramming incident an act of “domestic terrorism.” The department has not done so.

subscribe
The story must be told.
Your subscription supports journalism that matters.
Try 1 month for 99¢
Late Saturday night, Holder sent out two tweets. One said: “If ISIS rammed a car into a crowd this would be labeled quickly & logically. Charlottesville — call it what it is, domestic terrorism.”

About 11 p.m., the Justice Department said that a federal civil rights inquiry had been opened “into the circumstances of the deadly vehicular incident that occurred earlier Saturday morning.”

A person familiar with the probe said the investigation is not limited to the car’s driver, and agents will investigate whether others were involved in planning the episode.

The investigation will be conducted by the Richmond FBI Field Office, the Civil Rights Division and the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Western District of Virginia, headed by acting U.S. attorney Rick Mountcastle.

Wagner, Costa and Horwitz reported from Washington. Karoun Demirjian and Philip Rucker in Washington contributed to this report.

2.8k Comments
 Share on FacebookShare
  Share on TwitterTweet
Share via Email
John Wagner is a national political reporter covering the White House.  Follow @WPJohnWagner
Jenna Johnson is a political reporter who covers the White House. She spent more than a year writing about Donald Trump's presidential campaign, traveling to 35 states to attend more than 170 political rallies and interview hundreds of Trump supporters.  Follow @wpjenna
Robert Costa is a national political reporter at The Washington Post.  Follow @costareports
Sari Horwitz covers the Justice Department and criminal justice issues nationwide for The Washington Post, where she has been a reporter for 30 years.  Follow @sarihorwitz
 
PAID PROMOTED STORIES
 Why Doctors Will No Longer Prescribe Metformin (Watch)
Why Doctors Will No Longer Prescribe Metformin (Watch)
healthnewstips.today
 Where the World's Billionaires Live
Where the World's Billionaires Live
Mansion Global by Dow Jones
 Interpace Signs National Coverage Agreement With Aetna for Thyroid Tests
Interpace Signs National Coverage Agreement With Aetna for Thyroid Tests
360dx.com
 This game will keep you up all night!
This game will keep you up all night!
Throne: Kingdom at War
 15 million players are already addicted!
15 million players are already addicted!
Forge Of Empires
 This Game Can Train Your Brain to Think Strategically (No Joke!)
This Game Can Train Your Brain to Think Strategically (No Joke!)
Vikings
Recommended by

Most Read
1
White House confronts backlash over Trump’s remarks on Charlottesville
2
Alleged driver of car that plowed into Charlottesville crowd was a Nazi sympathizer, former teacher says
3
White House: Trump’s condemnation includes ‘white supremacists, KKK, neo-Nazi and all extremist groups’
4
Think things will be rosy for Democrats in 2018? Not so fast.
5
Analysis
These are the three reasons fascism spread in 1930s America — and might spread again today
subscribe
The story must be told.
Subscribe to The Washington Post.
Subscribe

Inside 'Trump Revealed'
Read stories based on reporting for “Trump Revealed,” a broad, comprehensive biography of the life of the president.
Reporting archive: Trump’s financial records, depositions and interview transcripts
Today's WorldView
What's most important from where the world meets Washington


E-mail address
 Add
washingtonpost.com
1996-2017 The Washington Post
 
Help and Contact Us
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Print Products Terms of Sale
Digital Products Terms of Sale
Submissions and Discussion Policy
RSS Terms of Service
Ad Choices
testtesttest